6 February 2008Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town this morning, 6th February 2008. The meeting discussed the latest developments regarding the electricity emergency and noted that although the country still had the capacity to generate electricity, the reserve margin of between 8 and 10 % continues to pose challenges which necessitate load-shedding in parts of the country. Government is satisfied that Eskom and the departments of Minerals and Energy, and of Public Enterprises are implementing plans to address the emergency situation in a coordinated manner and in consultation with the major energy users. Government appeals to all businesses and individual households to participate in the campaign to save electricity by reducing consumption by 10%. This move will improve the electricity reserve margin and assist Eskom to reduce load shedding in the short term while implementing the medium to long term measures to expand the country s generation capacity. Government will intensify interaction with major stakeholders to ensure their participation in the national effort to reduce demand. A special word of appreciation goes to all South Africans who are already saving energy in their homes, and to industry players, particularly the mining industry, for working with Eskom and government to help the country to manage this national emergency. Business Unity South Africa s role and commitment to encourage all its affiliates to save 10% of energy is also acknowledged and welcomed. The meeting received a report on the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Convention on Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions. The meeting noted that South Africa s report in this regard was being finalised and will be submitted to the OECD Working Group during the course of February 2008. Cabinet approved the programme for the Ministerial media briefings that are scheduled for the week of 11-15 February 2008 in Cape Town. The following appointments were approved: Enquiries Themba Maseko (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top