5 May 2008Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Pretoria on Wednesday, 30 April 2008. The Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC) on food prices, consisting of Ministers of Education, Public Works, Treasury, Social Development, Health, Minerals and Energy, Trade and Industry and The Presidency, tabled a progress report on the interventions that are under consideration. The proposed interventions will deal with short-, medium- and long-term measures to alleviate the impact of rising food prices on the poor, and to ensure household and national food security. The interventions under consideration include broadening and strengthening the coverage of social 'safety net' measures, enhancing the implementation of an Integrated Food Security and Nutrition Programme, and fast-tracking of the implementation of the land and agrarian reform programme to promote agricultural production and investment. Cabinet noted the report and urged the committee to ensure that the proposed interventions focus on providing a safety net to the poor, and are also designed to strengthen existing poverty alleviation programmes such as school feeding programmes. The National Agricultural Marketing Council is also participating in the process of developing the strategy on food prices, and it is expected that other stakeholders, including the private sector, will be invited to contribute to the programme. The details of the interventions will be announced in due course. Cabinet was briefed on the latest developments regarding the proposed electricity tariff hikes. Government will continue to engage stakeholders regarding the tariffs, in addition to the public hearings to be conducted by the National Electricity Regulator of South Africa (NERSA). The meeting reiterated that the impact of the electricity price increases on the poor should be minimised. The meeting endorsed the proposal for the convening of an energy summit to discuss the electricity emergency. The General Law Amendment Bill and National Prosecuting Authority Bill were approved. The Bills are aimed at strengthening the country s capability to fight organised crime and give effect to the decision to relocate the Directorate of Special Operations from the National Prosecuting Authority to the South African Police Service. The Bills will be tabled in Parliament. The meeting noted that the Khampepe Commission Report will be gazetted and released on the 05 May 2008. The Report laid the basis for the analysis and review of the criminal justice system. Progress reports on the implementation of the Government Programme of Action were considered and approved. These reports will form the basis of the ministerial media briefings scheduled for the week of 5 May, in Cape Town. The Smart ID card project was approved. The proposed smart card will replace the green identity book over a period of 5 to 8 years. The key advantages of the smart card will include secure and reliable identification, and the biometric data will be authenticated and verified on- and off-line. The project will be piloted by December 2008 and the smart card will be introduced in 2009. Efforts to strengthen South-South trade links and cooperation are continuing and will be accelerated. These will include trilateral ministerial discussion among members of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), India and the MERCOSUR (Common market of South America). Efforts are being put in place to expand IBSA (India, Brazil and South Africa) beyond high-level meetings, and in this regard, co-operation in areas such as health, education and infrastructure will receive priority attention. The meeting noted that SA will be hosting the African-Indian Ocean Regional Air Navigation meeting on 24-29 November 2008. The following appointments were approved: The following Bills were approved: Enquiries Themba Maseko (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top