23 October 2008Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town yesterday, 22 October 2008. Cabinet, on behalf of all South Africans, wishes all our students who will be sitting for their exams, particularly our Grade 12 learners, the best of luck in their forth-coming examinations. The whole country must express and show gratitude to the thousands of teachers who have given their very best to ensure that the learners are ready and well prepared to enter the examination rooms with the full confidence that they will succeed. This is the time for communities, particularly parents, to give our youngsters all the support they will need during this stressful period. Cabinet wishes Mama Albertina Sisulu a happy 90th Birthday. MaSisulu epitomises courage, resilience and an unwavering commitment to freedom and a relentless pursuit of a better life for all. Progress reports from the five clusters on the implementation of the Government Programme of Action were received and approved. These reports will be the subject of the Ministerial media briefings scheduled to begin on the 27th October 2008. Cabinet received a progress report on and noted the turnaround programme in the Department of Home Affairs. Some of the highlights of the project includes the following achievements; a new contact centre was established alongside the track and trace system for identity documents; the turn-around time for producing identity documents has been reduced from 127 to 47 days; a Large Accounts Unit was set up to expedite the issuing of work permits to companies involved in major infrastructure projects; and the training of 1200 front line staff. Further details will be outlined during the POA briefings by the Governance and Administration cluster. A progress report on the preparations for the 2010 FIFA World Cup was discussed and noted. The report indicated that the preparations for the 2009 Confederations Cup and the 2010 FIFA World Cup tournaments were on track. The progress report included the following; construction programme for the stadia was on track to meet all FIFA deadlines even though cost escalation still remains a challenge; Telkom s upgrade of its core fibre-optic network is progressing according to plan and is due for completion in the last quarter of 2008; the Public Transport Infrastructure Support programme is being implemented with most infrastructure either under construction or scheduled to start this year; Eskom has guaranteed that stadia construction and the soccer tournaments will not be adversely affected by any power outages; Safety, Security and the Disaster management plans have been completed. Cabinet noted that President Kgalema Motlanthe will confer the highest awards to men and women from all walks of life for their exceptional and distinguished contribution to the South African nation in the fields of arts, culture, literature, music, journalism and sport. The award ceremony will take place in Pretoria on the 28 October 2008. The meeting noted that the third India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) Summit was held in India from 13-15 October 2008. This summit played a key role in strengthening South-South relations and in creating opportunities for consolidating the economic gains that have already been achieved between the three nations. The cascading of IBSA beyond government to government interaction received a boost at this summit with civil society fora created on women, media, and the academia. GCIS, DFA and The Presidency will work together to ensure wider communication of achievements and opportunities that are created by IBSA. The annual celebration of National Children s Day will take place in Kimberley on 7 November 2008 under the theme: Business Unusual: All hands on deck - support municipalities in the advancement of child protection and development . This event will profile the gains that have been made in improving the lives of South Africa s children and will set the tone for the 2008 16 Days of Activism for No Violence Against Women and Children campaign which will commence on 25 November 2008 to 10 December 2008. Cabinet endorsed the hosting of the 18th Conference on African Ministers of Industry (CAMI) from 24 to 28 October at the Inkosi Albert Luthuli International Convention Centre in Durban. The meeting noted the upcoming United Nations Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) Conference which will take place from 27 to 28 November at the Birchwood Conference Centre in Boksburg, Johannesburg. The following appointments were approved: Enquiries Themba Maseko (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 083 645 0810 Issued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top